good afternoon and welcome to the
Downing Street
coronavirus daily briefing I'm joined
today by Professor Jonathan van tam the
deputy chief medical officer and by John
Newton our coordinator for testing today
I want to update you with the latest
plans for our programme of test track
and trace how we're going to use this
massive testing capability that we've
built in order to get our down and keep
our down before I do that I just want to
remind you of what we're trying to
achieve our plan is to slow the spread
and to protect the NHS so that the NHS
is always there for you and your family
whenever you need it
whether for coronavirus or anything else
that goal is working the number of spare
critical care beds in the NHS is 3413 on
the latest figures there have been 1
million 291,000 tests for coronavirus
including 85,000 186 tests on Sunday
yesterday a hundred and ninety thousand
584 people have now tested positive for
coronavirus an increase of three
thousand nine hundred and eighty-five
thirteen thousand two hundred and fifty
eight people are in hospital with
coronavirus and twenty eight thousand
seven hundred and thirty-four people
have died that's across all settings an
increase of 288 that figure is lower
than at any point since the end of March
but as with testing these reported
figures tend to be lower over the
weekend so we do do expect that number
to rise and remember this is not just a
number but it is a constant insistent
reminder that we must go further and
faster in our national effort in dealing
with this virus
over the last month we've built a
national testing infrastructure capable
of over a hundred thousand tests a day
today the capacity stands at a hundred
and eight thousand this means we're now
in a position to start implementing the
next part of our plan track and trace
the aim of test track and trace is to
hunt down and isolate the virus so it's
unable to reproduce and crucially test
track and trace allows us to take a more
targeted approach to lock down while
still safely containing the disease
creating this system is a huge national
undertaking of unprecedented scale and
complexity we've already taken Britain's
small but brilliant Diagnostics industry
and taken it to global scale we're
building an army of human contact races
who command the phones and find the
contacts and support people and of
course we're developing the contact
tracing app which can help us deliver
test track and trace on the mass scale
that we need across the country the app
which takes full consideration of
privacy and security has already been
tested in closed conditions at an RAF
base and today I can announce the next
steps from tomorrow we will begin to
pilot test track and trace on the Isle
of Wight starting with health
professionals and rolling out this week
to all citizens I'm grateful to the huge
enthusiasm shown by Islanders who who
know that by participating in this pilot
they're at the forefront of helping get
Britain back on her feet where the Isle
of Wight goes Britain follows the island
has a single NHS trust one local
authority with the responsibilities for
Public Health a relatively low number of
Kovac cases and because it's an island
we can run this trial in proper
scientifically controlled conditions
comparing the effect with the effect and
with what's going on on the mainland
before we roll it out to the rest of the
country so here's how it will work last
week we put in place the testing
capability on the island from tonight
the contact tracing capability will go
live and then tomorrow NHS staff on the
island will be able to download the app
and from Thursday each one of the 80,000
households on the island will get a
letter from the chief nurse with
comprehensive information about the
trial Islanders will then be asked to
install the app once you've installed
the app it'll start logging the distance
between your phone and other phones with
an app nearby it's been designed with a
form of Bluetooth that conserves power
so the app won't drain your battery and
this log of proximity information will
then be securely stored on your phone if
you become unwell with kovat symptoms
you inform the NHS via the app other app
users who you've had significant contact
with in the last few days will then be
sent an alert by the NHS along with
advice about what to do a test ordering
function will then be built-in if you're
watching this and you live on the Isle
of Wight I have a simple message please
download the app to protect the NHS and
save lives by downloading the app you're
protecting your own health you're
protecting the health of your loved ones
and the health of your community I know
the people of the Isle of Wight will
embrace this with enthusiasm because by
embarking on this project and by
embracing test track and trace you will
be saving lives the pilot is important
so we can help make sure the app works
as well as it possibly can alongside the
contact tracing system and with your
help we'll learn a lot we'll use it to
make things better and we want to hear
from you I want to stress and
is really important that this trial does
not mean the end of social distancing on
the Isle of Wight or anywhere else for
that matter
we will only change the social
distancing rules once our five tests are
met so I'll end with the instruction
that we all know please stay at home
protect the NHS and save lives or if you
live on the Isle of Wight stay at home
install the app protect the NHS and save
lives
I'll now turn to Professor van tam to
take us through the day's chants John
Thank You Secretary stage so let's begin
again with refreshing the five tests
that we have in place for deciding if
we're going to adjust the lockdown the
first is around NHS capacity and we're
in a good position on that one the
second one is about a sustained and
consistent fall in daily deaths from
coronavirus and it is now very clear in
the data that we are past the peak the
next one is solid information that the
rate of infection is decreasing to
manageable levels right across the board
this is an indicator that we need to
keep a close eye on over the next few
days and weeks the fourth one is around
operational challenges around testing
and PPE and being able to meet future
demand there are continuing challenges
on PPE it is an absolute priority to
continue pushing on this to get it right
in the long run but of course in on
testing as you've heard from the
secretary of state we're in a very good
position and finally we have to be
confident that the adjustments we
contemplate are not going to risk a
second peak of infections and this is
really a matter of deep scientific
discussion
very very close following an absorbing
of the evidence and one that we're
keeping under detailed scientific review
as the days and weeks go by next slide
please
now this slide actually shows search
data of people looking at Apple maps for
directions over driving over walking
routes or over using public transport
and it tells the same story as slides
you have seen before about how since we
announced these social distancing
measures the public continue to observe
the instructions to work with us to work
to protect the NHS and get case numbers
down and you can see very very
consistent trends over reduced searches
for driving instructions walking
instructions and use of public transport
so we need to keep going let's keep
going and continue to drop the curve
further next slide please
these are this is a graph showing from
the sixth of April through to the fourth
of May daily tests completed for
coronavirus and you can see on the right
hand side the latest data showing 85,000
tests completed on the fourth of May our
capacity is 108 thousand tests and there
is another lab opening next week so this
is all very encouraging tests are going
up people are using testing services
more and we are well within our capacity
capability next slide please
now this slide shows new cases of
coronavirus in the UK from the 21st of
March you can see that obvious peak up
to a high level in early April and then
you can
the pattern that has occurred in terms
of new cases right up until the fourth
of May on this one I have to say that
new cases need to come down further we
have to continue to track this index and
we have to get cases lower if you look
to the next slide please
here we array the number of people in
hospital with kovat 19 from 17th of
March through to the 3rd of May and
after Peaks in the middle of April you
can see that in almost all areas now
there are steady but absolutely
consistent declines occurring possibly
in a small number of areas the trend is
somewhat flat but overall there are now
steady declines in the number of people
in hospital this is good news following
on please the next slide critical care
beds ICU beds here again across all four
nations you can see largely continuing
declines and possibly a more important
point if you look at the axis on the
left of the slide the y-axis you can see
where we are in terms of capacity and
there is plenty of ICU capacity which is
extremely good I turn now to deaths in
all settings and here you can see that
there is a slow but consistent decline
you will see the weekend effect very
clearly especially if you look at the
three steps on the right-hand side of
the chart fewer deaths are actually
recorded reported at the weekends that's
an artifact of the way people report
deaths but overall if you look at the
orange line the seven-day and smoothed
out rolling average there is this slow
but consistent decline which is
absolutely going in the right direction
now and then the final slide is one we
have shown for
time showing a comparison across
countries dating back to the day when
50/50 cumulative deaths were recorded in
each of the countries and we're now
quite a way across the slide to 60 hour
days in some of the countries the
message is the same
as I've said to you before that there
are kind of three broad trends on this
curve but I do want to emphasize to you
these are numbers they are not rates
they do not adjust for the size of the
underlying population and this is a
difficulty in interpreting these data we
will in the course of time be able to
get all caused age-adjusted excess
mortality for many of the countries on
this slide and that will give us a much
clearer understanding of what is going
on and hopefully those data will
continue for a long period of time so
that we can understand the fullness of
the picture as we try to beat this virus
I will stop there with the data and hand
back to the Secretary of State thank you
very much Jonathan and we're now going
to take questions and the first question
from a member of the public we have a
video from sac lane from London what is
being done to ensure that be am a key
workers are not disproportionately
affected by co vid 19 and what steps are
being taken to provide support to the
families of those victims who are sadly
passed away Thank You Sakhalin an
incredibly important question to
impending incredibly important questions
both of which we're working hard to
address and I'm going to ask Jonathan to
set out the details but what I'd say
absolutely from the start is that we
recognize that there has been a
disproportionately high number of people
from black and ethnic minority
backgrounds who have passed away
especially amongst care workers and
those in
the NHS and I I pay tribute to them
before and I will do so again because
the NHS is an amazing organization that
has been built on the dedication of
people from all backgrounds and this
including many many who've come to this
country to to give their lives working
in the NHS and disproportionately
employs people from ethnic minority
backgrounds and yet we have seen this
impact in the data and I think it's
affected a lot of us working on it to
see that and so we've got a lot of work
going into fully understand
scientifically and make sure that in
every single case we learn what we can
to protect people better in terms of
support for the families of those who've
passed away for those working in the NHS
we have a we now have a program of
support that we've been able to put in
place that is there for everybody who
has say is from a family where where
somebody has died on waltz in service
and including across pharmacy across
social can that's so I think that's a
really important thing for us to do to
recognize the sacrifice of those put
themselves at risk by going to work in
this in what can be dangerous conditions
where they might be working with those
who have covered 19 Jonathan yes
I'm extremely sorry whenever I hear of a
healthcare worker death due to
coronavirus whether it's someone from a
black and minority ethnic group or
otherwise it doesn't change the fact
that it takes courage to work in the NHS
at a time like this
and it's most difficult on the subject
of the signal that we have so far on
black and minority ethnic groups I want
to say to you that we are taking it in
credit
seriously there is a very big piece of
scientific work now ongoing that will
report to the chief medical officer and
we'll get to the bottom of this however
long it takes us but I will also say
that this is a complicated picture
because when you start to study patterns
of disease across different ethnic
groups you also have to take into
account potential differences in the age
structure between groups also
differences in the patterns of
underlying medical conditions which we
know do vary by ethnic group and
therefore it's a complicated picture and
also deprivation has to be taken into
account where people live and all of
this is complex it takes time and I'm
not going to rush the answer I think we
owe it to minority ethnic groups to get
this right and get a clear signal for
you and you'll have worked out I'm from
an ethnic minority group and we will get
to the bottom of this it could be that
Professor Newton has some further
epidemiological granularity he'd like to
add on this point thank you Jonathan
well just to say that we are as you say
looking at the data very carefully not
just on ethnicity but also on age sex
and other factors such as obesity which
we know do have an impact on the effect
of coronavirus and but it's already
clear from some of the published data
that the impacted in bmu groups is
greater that there are more people with
the infection and those who have the
infection have have worse outcomes in
many cases so there is already cause for
concern but as Johnson says we're not in
Tyre it's not entirely clear how much of
that is due to different levels of
underlying conditions or other risk
factors so there is work to be done and
we will be publishing this as soon as
it's ready thank you very much thank you
Sakhalin the next questions from Conrad
from Ashford and Conrad asks going
forward will the primary aim of test
track and trace be to squash the
occurrence of covered 19 infection to
very low levels or simply to flatten the
enough that the NHS is not overwhelmed
and that is a really important question
comrade the answer is that test track
and trace will help us to get the r down
and to get the number of new cases down
and to keep it down
but not on its own it's primarily the
social distancing measures that we've
taken so far that have flattened the
curve and now the we can see that the
curve is going down from the
presentation that Professor van Town
just gave the goal is to keep the number
of new infections going down and bring
in the test track and trace or at a
point which we will do well tomorrow
from tomorrow in the Isle of Wight and
then rolling out to the rest of the
country will will the we will get those
numbers down the test tracking trace
becomes more effective the lower the
number and then we want to keep the
number going down by keeping the are
below 1 the rate of infection so it is
not our goal is not simply to flatten
the curve it is to get the occurrence of
covered 19 infections to very low levels
to be absolutely clear within your
question that that is the answer thanks
very much and we'll now take questions
from the media you PIM from the BBC
thank you very much when will you have
recruited your 18,000 contact tracers
and when will the full test track and
trace network be up and running the aim
is to have the whole thing up and
running in the by the middle of this
month we're starting already we've
already started the recruitment we have
of the 18,000 we have thousands already
recruited and we are making very rapid
progress not only in the recruitment but
also the the training that's necessary a
short piece of training and we have
enough to get going on the Isle of Wight
in fact they came on stream as of five
o'clock this evening so there that's
I'm running now and then to roll out
across the country but there's no
there's no magic around the 18,000
figure that is the initial scale that we
think is necessary if we needs to be
bigger when we find out from the ONS
survey that's in the field at the moment
what the prevalence of the disease is
the number of new cases per day actually
out there rather than that that we find
through positive tests then we will then
we'll adjust that figure that's the
initial goal but it'll be up and running
by the middle of the month of course on
business some businesses will be
required to have PPE for their staff
where will they procure it and will they
be in competition with the NHS well this
is a really important question when we
consider changes to the social
distancing man measures the wider impact
of changes to social distancing measures
including for instance on PPE and the
first call on PPE must go to the NHS and
social care and those other essential
services who need it to keep the people
delivering those services safe and so
that is something that we take into
account it's in our five tests but it is
something that we're working very hard
on now of course it's our job in running
the health and social care system to
ensure that those areas and the other
public services have PPE but and there's
a worldwide shortage and as you say so
we do need to take that into
consideration before making before
making changes and that's why it's one
of the five tests thanks very much Tom
Clark from ITV Thank You Secretary of
State's and the most successful contact
tracing efforts around the world like
those of you now South Korea Singapore
were only partly reliant on mobile phone
technology in order to work they were
more reliant on large numbers of
volunteers
community-level going out to track down
and trace cases at huge scale has the
government insured this capacity is in
place in the UK or are we putting too
much faith in call centres and in
untested it's a really important point
and I agree with the with the point in
the question which is that it isn't just
about the technology and the people in
call centres it's also about citizens
acting in the right way acting in the
right way to download the app because
that protects you and protects your
family and protects the NHS but also
acting in the right way to do contact
tracing yourself John really good it's a
really good point well made the app is
very exciting and the app adds something
extra that's some an automated response
that can be almost immediate but as you
say the program that we're putting in
place is an integrated program with the
app but also with contact tracing driven
by testing so access to testing partly
through the app but also other routes to
a test and then the test result backed
up by contact tracing driven by public
health professionals at one level we've
got public health England but also a lot
of experience on the ground with
directors of Public Health and local
authorities environmental health
officers who are very expert in this
exactly as you say shoe-leather
epidemiology out on the streets
finding contacts and but even actually
what people call traditional contact
tracing isn't very traditional anymore
it's quite it's quite highly technical
so we've developed a web-based support
the contact tracing an advisory service
which has been ramped up to support this
and there's also another line of defense
through the telephone call centre so
it's a multi-layered approach and one of
the points of the Isle of Wight test
pilot is to try and see how those
different elements integrate together to
support each other so it's a very good
point we are learning from the best
practice around the world but we also
have something to offer in the UK as
well because we've been doing this for a
long time thanks Tom I hope that answers
your question
yes I may have a quick follow up
question are we are we caught in
something of a catch-22 with contact
tracing as I understand
the numbers of cases have to fall quite
a bit more before we can reliably roll
it out across the country but if we keep
lockdown measures in place which we have
to until your fifth test is making it's
quite hard to pilot contact tracing
because most of us are trying to isolate
ourselves as much as possible so no it's
the short answer the and a lot of
slightly longer answer is that even with
social matter social distancing measures
there still are some new cases and the
and that means that the that the
technology can still be effective and
even with the scale of of of new cases
across the country contact tracing can
still have an impact and the app will
still be highly effective it's just more
effective the fewer the number of new
cases so these are all matters of degree
rather than absolute so we're not caught
in a in a in a catch-22 but it is
absolutely true that the social
distancing measures are the thing that
is doing they're having the big impact
and so the hence the you know the
message remains stay at home to protect
the NHS and save lives unless you're in
the Isle of Wight but in your even in
the Isle of Wight you should still stay
at home to protect the NHS and save
lives it's that you should also install
the app because that will help it this
to be yet more effective one final point
on this which is the Isle of Wight has a
slightly lower rate of covert new covert
infections than some other places in the
country and therefore actually is a that
makes it a good place to test this not
only is it good because it will help the
Isle of Wight but it is also good
because it has that slightly lower
number of new infections lockdown
measures until contact tracing is up and
running across the country
no the - aren't aren't necessarily
linked like that we have
said that you we can't make changes
before it's up and running it's just
that the test track and trace system
will help us to get our down and hold
our down and the lower the number of new
cases the more effective it will be but
we haven't made a concrete link that
your question drew between the number
between the having this system of in
place nationally and making changes to
the social distancing measures we there
isn't a necessary link between the two
they're just they they do work in tandem
the next question is from Oliver Dyer
from Isle of Wight radio even in all in
a poll that Isle of Wight radio ran
today 80% of our listeners said they
would install this new app but the
island has a higher than average elderly
population who fall into the governments
of vulnerable category
how are you expecting those who don't
have a smartphone or can't use that
technology be it on the island or across
the country to get behind this and with
that in mind considering the islands has
an elderly population one of the
questions our listeners want to know is
why the islands been chosen over other
over as a UK islands or locations so
look that's a great set of questions
Oliver and I'm really really pleased to
hear that 80% of people said that they
would download the app and because the
more people who download the app the
more effective it's going to be because
it's a you need you need two people
having downloaded the app for it to be
effective for one to be able to tell the
other that they've been in close contact
with somebody who's got symptoms of Cove
in 19 and so I'm really pleased that the
people of the Isle of Wight have
responded today in this way I had a
feeling that they would and I'm really
glad that they have and but partly
because of the challenges that you set
out that not everybody has a smartphone
that that's that's another reason
actually to test it in the Isle of Wight
because if we tested it somewhere where
it would be easy we wouldn't find as
many of the
the challenges rather than testing it
somewhere where you've got to do that
you've got to have the technology but
you've got to have the human contact
tracing as well they go they go hand in
hand they help each other and so that's
that is actually one of the things we
thought about before choosing the Isle
of Wight as the as the place to go first
yeah thank you I mean I think the other
white is an ideal place to do this it's
quite a large population and there is a
benefit in the fact that travel on and
off the island is relatively restricted
the ferries are there but they're
running relatively infrequently so it is
an ideal place to look at the
epidemiology and see the impact it's
also I used to be the Regional Director
of Public Health for South Central
including the Isle of Wight I know that
the island the island is is very well
equipped to respond to things that is
it's a very coherent group we've had
tremendous support from the local
authority from the NHS from the local MP
and like everybody else I think it's
going to be a great success as a as a
pilot and your point about elderly
people I think we shouldn't first you
shouldn't make assumptions and then
quite a lot of elderly people are
extremely tech savvy and quite happy to
use smart phones but we've also
recognised that there are other ways of
doing contact tracing so as I mentioned
we've built in a number of routes so
people don't have to have the app in
order to benefit but of course we will
all benefit if the app and the contact
tracing drives down the infection rate
it drives down the infection rate for
everybody and I think the third point to
say is that the people who are most
mobile and most likely to be out bumping
into each other are also the people who
are probably most likely to be using
smart phones so I think all in all we
think it's a strong program and we're
looking forward to seeing how it works
in your other white and that that survey
is extremely encouraging so thank you it
does yeah I'm gonna add one more
follow-up go ahead fantastic so
obviously whilst a lot of people will of
Allah by radio listens in particular I
have been positive about the app there
are some concerns that the lockdown
measures could be lifted here early to
form part of that trial could lock down
on the eyelid weight being lifted
earlier than the rest of the new tape
and if so is it safe to do so
well I want to thank Isle of Wight radio
listeners for how much they've engaged
with this
this this idea today and I can reassure
you that there aren't any changes to
social distancing measures that are
proposed as part of this pilot the pilot
is to find out how the app works how the
interaction of people then becomes
recognized by the technology and the the
link from that to the human contact
tracing and to the testing regime
because there's a new testing center on
the Isle of Wight as well
so there aren't changes our proposals
are that changes to be to the social
distancing will only take place when the
five tests are met and that's nationally
rather than the Isle of Wight having
having any differences in that part to
the rest of the country thanks very much
indeed Oliver Joe Murphy from the
Evening Standard good afternoon
um can I ask the scientists how has your
understanding of immunity developed over
the last month or so do you know yet
whether people will catch it again and
how are the tests developing how how the
testing of the tests going do you see
antibodies and immunity playing a really
significant role in easing out of
lockdown or not and sections take if I
could just ask a follow to Conrad's
question and who asked how low the
numbers we go you said very low can you
put a figure on that the answer to the
second question is no and the answer to
the first question is and I'll say a
little and then I'll ask both scientists
to come in John on the testing and jbt
on the science of immunity what I'd say
is that antibody testing is incredibly
important we have antibody tests in the
field at the moment they're being used
for surveys they are lab based rather
than the rather than the automatic
response tests
that we looked into in great detail a
month or so ago but then none of them
were effective enough to be used for
clinical reasons but they can still be
used for surveys so we have surveys in
the field both with the the stick tests
and also with lab based serology which
detects antibodies so we will be getting
estimates soon of the proportion of the
population who have the antibodies and
the test tests for whether the
antibodies are there the effect of the
antibodies on your risk to catching or
transmitting corona virus in the future
is is the is the next important step in
that and the science on that has been
rapidly developing and I'll ask jvt to
update on that yes thank you for the
question so on antibodies one of the
things we want to know is when you've
had in Kovac 19 infection do you get
antibodies do they protect you against
further instances of the same illness
and how long are they going to protect
you for so that's kind of three
questions really
so let's chop this up into three answers
and the first answer is the first thing
we wanted to know was once you've had
confirmed kovat 19 infection do you get
antibodies and one of the things that
we've been interested in and want to do
is call people back who've had a Ovid 19
for sure and who've recovered to ask
them if they'll begin to take part in a
program we're starting to get plasma
containing antibodies and use it for
treatment in the future in trials to
understand if it's going to work and
save lives and the good news on that is
that that program has started and the
overwhelming majority of people so far
called back who've had definite Kove in
19 infection
have got antibodies in their bloodstream
which is a good news thing so those
antibodies take different times in
different people to develop but by and
large the signal is that people get
antibodies the next question is do those
antibodies protect you from further
infections and we just haven't had this
disease around on the planet in humans
for long enough to know the answers to
that with any surety and that's a piece
of science that we will just have to
follow a bit longer I hope the answer is
yes but I think it's one where we have
to be much clearer before we can take
that responsibility of giving you a very
clear answer on that and then the final
piece is how long will the antibodies
last and we do know that for other
normal coronaviruses if that's the right
word the ones that are a couple of
viruses that together with many others
cause what we'd call the common cold
that those antibodies don't persist
necessarily for years and years and
years now it doesn't follow that that's
going to be the case with kovat 19 we do
not know at this point we will have to
simply follow people who've recovered
and test them repeatedly until we have
an understanding of how long antibodies
last and how long they protect for but
there is an absolutely massive piece of
work now underway multiple studies to
look for antibodies in different
populations in the UK and indeed to
follow some people who've recovered for
long periods of time into the future at
least a couple of years and we will have
much clearer signals over time but I'm
afraid it's just one of those where we
can't make the science go any faster
than how quickly our bodies go in terms
of maintaining the antibodies and like
everybody else in the world
we just have to be patient and cautious
until we get those answer
but I do believe in the long run once we
have those kind of answers potentially
antibody testing will be a very
important part of our future strategy
Thanks
in fact I'm so because I was tested
positive and now I have the I have
fairly regularly somebody comes and
takes blood to ensure that to test
whether I have antibodies and then also
to test whether I get it again because
we have surveys in the field right now
to test if people with antibodies then
catch the disease which is an absolutely
critical fact that will then determine
policy over what we say people with
antibodies who tested positive on an
antibody test can do and which is at the
moment we don't yet have the science to
make those policy decisions but it'll be
absolutely critical John did you have
anything to add on that's just just
briefly on the testing there's been
really very good progress on the
antibody test there are at least two
large commercial organizations who
develop good lab based antibody tests
which we're currently evaluating but
also people looking at ways in of doing
antibody tests close to the person the
patient and there a number of options
there including a saliva test and all of
these options are looking quite
promising and being evaluated so I think
in general we can say as we did as we
thought that there would be antibody
tests available when we needed them and
they will support also our contact
tracing program and strategy later on
testing a follow-up state and thank you
all three for very informative answers
there so to state life's full of risks
and this is all about balance of risks
you're somebody who's probably got
antibodies would you feel happy going
into a crowded room not yet not yet I
very much hope that the science shows
that the people with antibodies who
tested positive for having antibodies
are have a low risk of transmitting the
disease and a low risk of catching it
both are important because low risk of
catching it to protect me low risk of
transmitting it to protect others
I much hope that that
where the science comes out that is true
of most coronaviruses i but we've got to
make sure that we've got the science
because until we know that's the case we
can't be sure of it we can't base a
policy decision on it and I can't be
comfortable doing what you mentioned in
the question because that might simply
trigger a rise in the number of
infections if the science turns out to
be wrong and there are so many novel
things about this coronavirus the there
are so many things that are different to
previous there's the six existing
coronaviruses that we do have to test
this and not base our assumptions on how
other coronaviruses behave because you
you know i we don't want to take the
risk of assuming this coronavirus
behaves like other coronaviruses before
saying and taking a policy decision that
people with antibodies are lower risk
but if the science concludes that they
that they are then will take decisions
on on that basis and i would say this
this point of john's that there's been
big advances in antibody testing
especially the lab based antibody
testing is very it's very important
today rush the swiss global diagnostics
company made a very positive
announcement about progress with their
antibody tests and we're in discussions
with them about a very large scale
rollout of antibody testing as well as
with some others who may be able to
bring this forward but there's been
false hope before in antibody testing
and so I will will make announcements
when we're absolutely ready thanks very
much Joe Paul wor from the Huffington
Post
L secretary as you frequently said the
long-term solution to this pandemic is a
fully scaled up vaccine for kovin 19
yeah but a vaccine relies on as many
people as possible actually taking it up
now you told HuffPost last year and i
quote there's a very strong argument for
having compulsory vaccinations for
children for when they go to school
because otherwise they're putting
of the children at risk would that apply
to a covert vaccine as well as to MMR
and other vaccines and what other
measures are you looking at to ensure as
many adults and children take up the new
vaccine when it's available and if I can
to Professor van Tam can I ask you what
you've made of the early academic
research done in Harvard Germany and
even Cambridge that suggests high levels
of air pollution maybe one of the most
important contributors to the clustering
of deaths from kovat 19 is sage looking
at that or going to look at that thanks
Paul two very good questions on the
vaccine and the first and most important
thing is that we support the development
of the vaccine and you all have seen the
Prime Minister's excellent announcement
today and then that we also ensure do
the work to ensure that people can get
access to the vaccines starting with
those who are most vulnerable and the on
the question of whether to make it
compulsory I think that the extent of
the public's reaction to following the
lockdown shows that we will be able to
achieve very very high levels of
vaccination without taking that step and
and so you know our task is to ensure
that it is in the first instance we
support the science as much as possible
because we can't assume there'll be a
vaccine there is no coronavirus vaccine
yet and for any of the existing
coronaviruses and this is uncertain
science but whilst I don't rule anything
out I we're presuming we're proceeding
on the basis that just such a huge
proportion of the population are going
to take this up because of the obvious
benefits to individuals and their
families and their communities and
indeed the whole nation that there'll be
an enormous demand for it as and when
the science is safe to proceed Thank You
secretary so just to stay on the vaccine
question for a little longer
and we are following the developments in
vaccine research across the world
including in the UK we remain very
hopeful
that there will be a breakthrough at
some point in the future I think what I
can say to you is that it is more likely
than not that the first vaccines will be
licensed in adults in the first instance
and therefore one has to take put some
caveats around your question around
children and the other thing to say is
that so far the epidemiological evidence
is not showing us that there is a
massive burden of disease or burden of
mortality and children it is actually
completely at the other end of the scale
it is in the elderly and so from that
perspective again that's another caveat
I'd add to your question about
vaccinating children on the second
question about air pollution and thank
you for that I think we already have
very solid data that air pollution
contributes to a whole range of
mortality particularly from respiratory
illnesses and respiratory diseases and
cardiovascular disease I have heard it
said about air pollution and kovat 19 I
have not personally studied those data
and looked at that question in detail
but what you say is entirely plausible
in my view and professor Newton may have
some further observations on air
pollution well they're only your general
point that we know that air pollution
because it's so pervasive and affects so
many people has a huge burden but like
John I haven't those papers but but I
think there's something that we will get
back to you yeah they're just one brief
follow-up secretary state do you have a
message for those anti-vaxxers here and
abroad when we when and if we do get a
vaccine took over in nineteen I think
there has been no greater demonstration
in modern history that vaccines save
lives than the need for a vaccine to
save lives and to get the world going
again following the outbreak of kovat
nineteen and we will only license of
see what it is both effective and safe
and when the independent regulators if
and when the independent regulators
license a vaccine in this country they
will do so knowing that it will that it
is safe and everybody should follow that
everybody should follow that advice
thanks very much
finally we're going to go to Louise Hill
from the Isle of Wight County press
Thank You mr. secretary and as local
democracy reporter on the Isle of Wight
I have seen a mixed reaction to the app
but a main concern that keeps occurring
is whether you can assure Island
residents who are wary of using the app
and this technology that their data will
be kept fully protected and private
throughout this trial and going forward
and the government will be fully
transparent with Islanders about the way
this app works yes absolutely this is an
incredibly important question I was very
glad to hear from Oliver from Isle of
Wight radio that on his initial survey
there was a very high degree of support
for the for the app and for downloading
it but it has been the app has been
designed with privacy and security front
of mind it's been signed off by the
National Cyber Security Center who've
been involved in its development I want
to thank them and pay tribute to the
work that they've done in ensuring that
the privacy and cybersecurity is strong
the data is stored on an individual's
phone not by the by the NHS until
somebody finds that they've got symptoms
and then they need a test and so they
need to connect the NHS and then you
need to the NHS needs to contact those
who you've been in contact with and so
the the this has this has the highest
level of privacy built in to make sure
that we can both reassure people in
terms of privacy but also that it can be
effective and save lives I don't know if
you've got anything that exactly right
so today
just to be absolutely clear the app
itself doesn't hold any personal
information it just has information
about the phone where it was which other
phones it's been in contact with but
only using anonymized randomly generated
numbers and those are the data that are
collated so no personal information is
general is that is contained by the app
or generated by their a circular said
the only personal information used is
when somebody approaches the nhts to
have a test or to have their contact
race so it is a it's a very safe use of
data and people really should feel very
reassured by all the have been taken
thanks very much indeed thank you from
the island have you got a follow-up
you've got it so as you said earlier
we're told to look down won't be eased
on the island as part of the roller
rollout of this app does that that means
people are already either at home or
making very limited trips and as the app
is predominantly aimed at the islands
keys workers will that guarantee enough
useful data for the app going forward
this is a really important question that
we thought about when selecting where to
to trial it because there's a busy
hospital on the island and there's other
and key workers including those who work
for the council for instance and in the
other services and the right across the
board there are there are interactions
and there are new cases on the island
and so we think that that it will be
effective and it will be an effective
place to pilot but also but we think
that the that the test track and trace
system as a whole will be more effective
when there are fewer new cases because
then when you do find a new case we can
really support that person find out who
they've been in contact with and then
contact all of those people and it's
quite a metallo of effort and support
into then trying to stop that case from
spreading any further so actually the
the the test track and trade system as a
whole will be more
effective when there's fewer cases and
currently there are fewer cases on the
island than there are in the rest of the
country thank you very much indeed
thanks to for all the questions from the
public from the national media from the
Isle of Wight and and I'm very grateful
for this opportunity to have set out
these details of our test track a test
track and trace program and look forward
to seeing you again here from here in
Downing Street very soon thanks very
much